+++
author = "Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service"
categories = ["Archive", "2024", "Monthly"]
date = 2023-12-17T15:00:00Z
description = "#070 edition of the EKS newsletter"
draft = false
slug = "070"
title = "EKS News 070"
+++
{{< eo >}}
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
In this edition we feature exciting new launches such as Amazon EKS Auto Mode, Amazon EKS Hybrid Nodes and operational enhancements such as launch of Node Health Monitoring and Auto-repair for Amazon EKS.

## New AWS services and features

* [Amazon EKS Auto Mode](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2024/12/amazon-eks-auto-mode/)
  * Amazon EKS Auto Mode fully automates Kubernetes cluster management for compute, storage, and networking on AWS with a single click. It simplifies Kubernetes management by automatically provisioning infrastructure, selecting optimal compute instances, dynamically scaling resources, continuously optimizing costs, managing core add-ons, patching operating systems, and integrating with AWS security services.
  * With Amazon EKS Auto Mode, you can leverage the scalability and operational excellence of AWS without deep Kubernetes expertise or ongoing infrastructure management overhead. By offloading cluster operations to AWS, you can get started quickly, improve performance, and reduce overhead, enabling you to focus on building applications that drive innovation rather than on cluster management tasks.
  * This [blog article](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/streamline-kubernetes-cluster-management-with-new-amazon-eks-auto-mode/) serves as walkthrough guide to dive deep into capabilities of Amazon EKS Auto Mode.

* [Amazon EKS Hybrid Nodes](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2024/12/amazon-eks-hybrid-nodes/)
  * Amazon EKS Hybrid Nodes unifies management of Kubernetes across cloud, on-premises and edge environments, giving you the flexibility to run your workloads anywhere, while driving higher availability, scalability, and efficiency.
  * It standardizes Kubernetes operations and tooling across environments and natively integrates with AWS services for centralized monitoring, logging, and identity management.
  * EKS Hybrid Nodes reduces the time and effort required for managing Kubernetes on premises and at the edge by offloading the availability and scalability of the Kubernetes control plane to AWS. EKS Hybrid Nodes can run on your existing infrastructure to accelerate modernization without additional hardware investment.
  * This [blog article](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/use-your-on-premises-infrastructure-in-amazon-eks-clusters-with-amazon-eks-hybrid-nodes/) serves as walkthrough guide to dive deep into capabilities of Amazon EKS Hybrid Nodes.

* [Announcing Node Health Monitoring and Auto-Repair for Amazon EKS](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2024/12/node-health-monitoring-auto-repair-amazon-eks/)
  * Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) now monitors the health of the EC2 instances (nodes) in EKS clusters for Kubernetes-specific health issues and automatically takes action to repair them if they become unhealthy.
  * You can enable this feature’s health monitoring and repair capabilities by installing the new EKS node monitoring agent add-on in new or existing EKS clusters and then enabling node auto-repair in the EKS managed node group APIs or AWS Console.
  * EKS Auto Mode comes with both the node monitoring agent and node auto-repair enabled.
  * This [documentation page](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/node-health.html) serves as guide to dive deep into node monitoring agent and auto repair feature.

## AWS blogs

* [**Blog**] [Migrating from x86 to AWS Graviton on Amazon EKS using Karpenter](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/migrating-from-x86-to-aws-graviton-on-amazon-eks-using-karpenter/)
  * Application rollout on multiple CPU architectures necessitates preparation and adaption to your operational requirements.
  * This blog article serves as comprehensive guide to get an overview of strategies and best practices for migrating your application to AWS Graviton on Amazon EKS.

* [**Blog**] [How HP achieved 40% improvement in Kubernetes node utilization on Amazon EKS using Karpenter](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/how-hp-achieved-40-improvement-in-kubernetes-node-utilization-utilization-on-amazon-eks-using-karpenter/)
  * Streamlining Node lifecycle management while optimizing resource usage for cost savings is very essential in large scale EKS deployments.
  * The blog article serves as case study analysis on how HP PrintOS implemented a cost-effective workflow for dynamically provisioning Amazon EKS worker nodes by combining Karpenter with Argo Workflows to achieve necessary goals.

* [**Blog**] [How Vannevar Labs cut ML inference costs by 45% using Ray on Amazon EKS](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/how-vannevar-labs-cut-ml-inference-costs-by-45-using-ray-on-amazon-eks/)
  * Today, a number of customers are implementing Inference solutions on Amazon EKS. With the scale, comes added responsibility to optimize cluster for cost performance while achieving cost saving goals.
  * This blog article serves as case study on how Vannevar combined modern cloud technologies such as Amazon EKS, Ray, Karpenter, and Istio to optimize ML inference workloads.

* [**Blog**] [Expedite Production Ready Distributed Application Development with Dapr on AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/expedite-production-ready-distributed-application-development-with-dapr-on-aws/)
  * Dapr (Distributed Application Runtime) is an open source project aiming to make secure and reliable microservices development easier, regardless of the programming language or framework.
  * This blog article dives deep into how open source Dapr can help developers build reliable and secure distributed applications with in-built best practices and patterns.

## Community news and articles

* [Kubernetes v1.32 Penelope](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/12/11/kubernetes-v1-32-release/)
  * Kubernetes v1.32: Penelope commemorates 10 years of cloud-native innovation with 44 enhancements, including stable Dynamic Resource Allocation for specialized hardware, asynchronous scheduler preemption for improved efficiency, and automated PVC cleanup for StatefulSets, showcasing a decade of community-driven progress and cutting-edge advancements.

* [Kubernetes for databases: weighing the pros and cons](https://www.cncf.io/blog/2024/11/27/kubernetes-for-databases-weighing-the-pros-and-cons)
  * As Kubernetes has become the default infrastructure layer for many enterprises, running databases on Kubernetes is becoming more prevalent. This article goes through pros and cons of using Kubernetes to run database workloads.

* [Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) - Incident Detection and Response Alarming Best Practices](https://repost.aws/articles/ARhnAXjQGMSr2l2_qb_J8uaA)
  * This article explores some of the best practices for Incident detection and response when using Amazon EKS.

## Videos and webinars

* [AWS re:Invent 2024 - Kubernetes Playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2yQDdvlhXf9A21fHF45j_sciYhGuuWXb&si=Ilxz0MDRhyOpVg3i)

* [Amazon EKS Auto Mode](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IQjsFlkqWQY)

* [Event Series: Simplifying Kubernetes operations with Amazon EKS Auto Mode](https://aws-experience.com/emea/smb/events/series/simplifying-kubernetes-operations-with-amazon-eks-auto-mode)

## Open source projects

* [Kubernetes Spec Explorer](https://kubespec.dev/)
  * kubespec provides documentation for all builtin resources, properties, types, and examples with tree view of resources for specified Kubernetes version.